docs/running.rst, before:

.. _running:

Running Supervisor
==================

This section makes reference to a :envvar:`BINDIR` when explaining how
to run the :command:`supervisord` and :command:`supervisorctl`
commands.  This is the "bindir" directory that your Python
installation has been configured with.  For example, for an
installation of Python installed via ``./configure
--prefix=/usr/local/py; make; make install``, :envvar:`BINDIR` would
be :file:`/usr/local/py/bin`. Python interpreters on different
platforms use a different :envvar:`BINDIR`.  Look at the output of
``setup.py install`` if you can't figure out where yours is.

Adding a Program
----------------

Before :program:`supervisord` will do anything useful for you, you'll
need to add at least one ``program`` section to its configuration.
The ``program`` section will define a program that is run and managed
when you invoke the :command:`supervisord` command.  To add a program,
you'll need to edit the :file:`supervisord.conf` file.

One of the simplest possible programs to run is the UNIX
:program:`cat` program.  A ``program`` section that will run ``cat``
when the :program:`supervisord` process starts up is shown below.

.. code-block:: ini

   [program:foo]
   command=/bin/cat

This stanza may be cut and pasted into the :file:`supervisord.conf`
file.  This is the simplest possible program configuration, because it
only names a command.  Program configuration sections have many other
configuration options which aren't shown here.  See
:ref:`programx_section` for more information.

Running :program:`supervisord`
------------------------------

To start :program:`supervisord`, run :file:`$BINDIR/supervisord`.  The
resulting process will daemonize itself and detach from the terminal.
It keeps an operations log at :file:`$CWD/supervisor.log` by default.

You may start the :command:`supervisord` executable in the foreground
by passing the ``-n`` flag on its command line.  This is useful to
debug startup problems.

.. warning::

   When :program:`supervisord` starts up, it will search for its
   configuration file in default locations *including the current working
   directory*.  If you are security-conscious you will probably want to
   specify a "-c" argument after the :program:`supervisord` command
   specifying an absolute path to a configuration file to ensure that someone
   doesn't trick you into running supervisor from within a directory that
   contains a rogue ``supervisord.conf`` file.  A warning is emitted when
   supervisor is started as root without this ``-c`` argument.

To change the set of programs controlled by :program:`supervisord`,
edit the :file:`supervisord.conf` file and ``kill -HUP`` or otherwise
restart the :program:`supervisord` process.  This file has several
example program definitions.

The :command:`supervisord` command accepts a number of command-line
options.  Each of these command line options overrides any equivalent
value in the configuration file.

:command:`supervisord` Command-Line Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-c FILE, --configuration=FILE

   The path to a :program:`supervisord` configuration file.

-n, --nodaemon

   Run :program:`supervisord` in the foreground.

-s, --silent

   No output directed to stdout.

-h, --help

   Show :command:`supervisord` command help.

-u USER, --user=USER

   UNIX username or numeric user id.  If :program:`supervisord` is
   started as the root user, setuid to this user as soon as possible
   during startup.

-m OCTAL, --umask=OCTAL

   Octal number (e.g. 022) representing the :term:`umask` that should
   be used by :program:`supervisord` after it starts.

-d PATH, --directory=PATH

   When supervisord is run as a daemon, cd to this directory before
   daemonizing.

-l FILE, --logfile=FILE

   Filename path to use as the supervisord activity log.

-y BYTES, --logfile_maxbytes=BYTES

   Max size of the supervisord activity log file before a rotation
   occurs.  The value is suffix-multiplied, e.g "1" is one byte, "1MB"
   is 1 megabyte, "1GB" is 1 gigabyte.

-z NUM, --logfile_backups=NUM

   Number of backup copies of the supervisord activity log to keep
   around.  Each logfile will be of size ``logfile_maxbytes``.

-e LEVEL, --loglevel=LEVEL

   The logging level at which supervisor should write to the activity
   log.  Valid levels are ``trace``, ``debug``, ``info``, ``warn``,
   ``error``, and ``critical``.

-j FILE, --pidfile=FILE

   The filename to which supervisord should write its pid file.

-i STRING, --identifier=STRING

   Arbitrary string identifier exposed by various client UIs for this
   instance of supervisor.

-q PATH, --childlogdir=PATH

   A path to a directory (it must already exist) where supervisor will
   write its ``AUTO`` -mode child process logs.

-k, --nocleanup

   Prevent :program:`supervisord` from performing cleanup (removal of
   old ``AUTO`` process log files) at startup.

-a NUM, --minfds=NUM

   The minimum number of file descriptors that must be available to
   the supervisord process before it will start successfully.

-t, --strip_ansi

   Strip ANSI escape sequences from all child log process.

-v, --version

   Print the supervisord version number out to stdout and exit.

--profile_options=LIST

   Comma-separated options list for profiling.  Causes
   :program:`supervisord` to run under a profiler, and output results
   based on the options, which is a comma-separated list of the
   following: ``cumulative``, ``calls``, ``callers``.
   E.g. ``cumulative,callers``.

--minprocs=NUM

   The minimum number of OS process slots that must be available to
   the supervisord process before it will start successfully.


Running :program:`supervisorctl`
--------------------------------

To start :program:`supervisorctl`, run ``$BINDIR/supervisorctl``.  A
shell will be presented that will allow you to control the processes
that are currently managed by :program:`supervisord`.  Type "help" at
the prompt to get information about the supported commands.

The :command:`supervisorctl` executable may be invoked with "one time"
commands when invoked with arguments from a command line.  An example:
``supervisorctl stop all``.  If arguments are present on the
command-line, it will prevent the interactive shell from being
invoked.  Instead, the command will be executed and ``supervisorctl``
will exit with a code of 0 for success or running and non-zero for
error. An example: ``supervisorctl status all`` would return non-zero
if any single process was not running.

If :command:`supervisorctl` is invoked in interactive mode against a
:program:`supervisord` that requires authentication, you will be asked
for authentication credentials.

:command:`supervisorctl` Command-Line Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-c, --configuration

   Configuration file path (default /etc/supervisord.conf)

-h, --help

   Print usage message and exit

-i, --interactive

   Start an interactive shell after executing commands

-s, --serverurl URL

   URL on which supervisord server is listening (default "http://localhost:9001").

-u, --username

   Username to use for authentication with server

-p, --password

   Password to use for authentication with server

-r, --history-file

   Keep a readline history (if readline is available)

`action [arguments]`

Actions are commands like "tail" or "stop".  If -i is specified or no action is
specified on the command line, a "shell" interpreting actions typed
interactively is started.  Use the action "help" to find out about available
actions.


:command:`supervisorctl` Actions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

help

   Print a list of available actions

help <action>

   Print help for <action>

add <name> [...]

   Activates any updates in config for process/group

remove <name> [...]

   Removes process/group from active config
   
update

   Reload config and add/remove as necessary, and will restart affected programs
   
update all

   Reload config and add/remove as necessary, and will restart affected programs

update <gname> [...]

   Update specific groups, and will restart affected programs

clear <name>

   Clear a process' log files.

clear <name> <name>

   Clear multiple process' log files

clear all

   Clear all process' log files

fg <process>

   Connect to a process in foreground mode
   Press Ctrl+C to exit foreground

pid

   Get the PID of supervisord.

pid <name>

   Get the PID of a single child process by name.

pid all

   Get the PID of every child process, one per line.

reload

   Restarts the remote supervisord

reread

   Reload the daemon's configuration files, without add/remove (no restarts)

restart <name>

   Restart a process
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

restart <gname>:*

   Restart all processes in a group
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

restart <name> <name>

   Restart multiple processes or groups
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

restart all

   Restart all processes
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

signal

   No help on signal

start <name>

   Start a process

start <gname>:*

   Start all processes in a group

start <name> <name>

   Start multiple processes or groups

start all

   Start all processes

status

   Get all process status info.

status <name>

   Get status on a single process by name.

status <name> <name>

   Get status on multiple named processes.

stop <name>

   Stop a process

stop <gname>:*

   Stop all processes in a group

stop <name> <name>

   Stop multiple processes or groups

stop all

   Stop all processes

tail [-f] <name> [stdout|stderr] (default stdout)

   Output the last part of process logs
   Ex:
   tail -f <name>		Continuous tail of named process stdout Ctrl-C to exit.
   tail -100 <name>	last 100 *bytes* of process stdout
   tail <name> stderr	last 1600 *bytes* of process stderr


Signals
-------

The :program:`supervisord` program may be sent signals which cause it
to perform certain actions while it's running.

You can send any of these signals to the single :program:`supervisord`
process id.  This process id can be found in the file represented by
the ``pidfile`` parameter in the ``[supervisord]`` section of the
configuration file (by default it's :file:`$CWD/supervisord.pid`).

Signal Handlers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``SIGTERM``

  :program:`supervisord` and all its subprocesses will shut down.
  This may take several seconds.

``SIGINT``

  :program:`supervisord` and all its subprocesses will shut down.
  This may take several seconds.

``SIGQUIT``

  :program:`supervisord` and all its subprocesses will shut down.
  This may take several seconds.

``SIGHUP``

  :program:`supervisord` will stop all processes, reload the
  configuration from the first config file it finds, and start all
  processes.

``SIGUSR2``

  :program:`supervisord` will close and reopen the main activity log
  and all child log files.

Runtime Security
----------------

The developers have done their best to assure that use of a
:program:`supervisord` process running as root cannot lead to
unintended privilege escalation.  But **caveat emptor**.  Supervisor
is not as paranoid as something like DJ Bernstein's
:term:`daemontools`, inasmuch as :program:`supervisord` allows for
arbitrary path specifications in its configuration file to which data
may be written.  Allowing arbitrary path selections can create
vulnerabilities from symlink attacks.  Be careful when specifying
paths in your configuration.  Ensure that the :program:`supervisord`
configuration file cannot be read from or written to by unprivileged
users and that all files installed by the supervisor package have
"sane" file permission protection settings.  Additionally, ensure that
your ``PYTHONPATH`` is sane and that all Python standard
library files have adequate file permission protections.

Running :program:`supervisord` automatically on startup
-------------------------------------------------------

If you are using a distribution-packaged version of Supervisor, it should
already be integrated into the service management infrastructure of your
distribution.

There are user-contributed scripts for various operating systems at:
https://github.com/Supervisor/initscripts

There are some answers at Serverfault in case you get stuck:
`How to automatically start supervisord on Linux (Ubuntu)`__

.. __: http://serverfault.com/questions/96499/how-to-automatically-start-supervisord-on-linux-ubuntu

Commit message:

feat: Compression rotated logs feature
PR from: https://github.com/Supervisor/supervisor/pull/1546

docs/running.rst, after:

.. _running:

Running Supervisor
==================

This section makes reference to a :envvar:`BINDIR` when explaining how
to run the :command:`supervisord` and :command:`supervisorctl`
commands.  This is the "bindir" directory that your Python
installation has been configured with.  For example, for an
installation of Python installed via ``./configure
--prefix=/usr/local/py; make; make install``, :envvar:`BINDIR` would
be :file:`/usr/local/py/bin`. Python interpreters on different
platforms use a different :envvar:`BINDIR`.  Look at the output of
``setup.py install`` if you can't figure out where yours is.

Adding a Program
----------------

Before :program:`supervisord` will do anything useful for you, you'll
need to add at least one ``program`` section to its configuration.
The ``program`` section will define a program that is run and managed
when you invoke the :command:`supervisord` command.  To add a program,
you'll need to edit the :file:`supervisord.conf` file.

One of the simplest possible programs to run is the UNIX
:program:`cat` program.  A ``program`` section that will run ``cat``
when the :program:`supervisord` process starts up is shown below.

.. code-block:: ini

   [program:foo]
   command=/bin/cat

This stanza may be cut and pasted into the :file:`supervisord.conf`
file.  This is the simplest possible program configuration, because it
only names a command.  Program configuration sections have many other
configuration options which aren't shown here.  See
:ref:`programx_section` for more information.

Running :program:`supervisord`
------------------------------

To start :program:`supervisord`, run :file:`$BINDIR/supervisord`.  The
resulting process will daemonize itself and detach from the terminal.
It keeps an operations log at :file:`$CWD/supervisor.log` by default.

You may start the :command:`supervisord` executable in the foreground
by passing the ``-n`` flag on its command line.  This is useful to
debug startup problems.

.. warning::

   When :program:`supervisord` starts up, it will search for its
   configuration file in default locations *including the current working
   directory*.  If you are security-conscious you will probably want to
   specify a "-c" argument after the :program:`supervisord` command
   specifying an absolute path to a configuration file to ensure that someone
   doesn't trick you into running supervisor from within a directory that
   contains a rogue ``supervisord.conf`` file.  A warning is emitted when
   supervisor is started as root without this ``-c`` argument.

To change the set of programs controlled by :program:`supervisord`,
edit the :file:`supervisord.conf` file and ``kill -HUP`` or otherwise
restart the :program:`supervisord` process.  This file has several
example program definitions.

The :command:`supervisord` command accepts a number of command-line
options.  Each of these command line options overrides any equivalent
value in the configuration file.

:command:`supervisord` Command-Line Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-c FILE, --configuration=FILE

   The path to a :program:`supervisord` configuration file.

-n, --nodaemon

   Run :program:`supervisord` in the foreground.

-s, --silent

   No output directed to stdout.

-h, --help

   Show :command:`supervisord` command help.

-u USER, --user=USER

   UNIX username or numeric user id.  If :program:`supervisord` is
   started as the root user, setuid to this user as soon as possible
   during startup.

-m OCTAL, --umask=OCTAL

   Octal number (e.g. 022) representing the :term:`umask` that should
   be used by :program:`supervisord` after it starts.

-d PATH, --directory=PATH

   When supervisord is run as a daemon, cd to this directory before
   daemonizing.

-l FILE, --logfile=FILE

   Filename path to use as the supervisord activity log.

-y BYTES, --logfile_maxbytes=BYTES

   Max size of the supervisord activity log file before a rotation
   occurs.  The value is suffix-multiplied, e.g "1" is one byte, "1MB"
   is 1 megabyte, "1GB" is 1 gigabyte.

-z NUM, --logfile_backups=NUM

   Number of backup copies of the supervisord activity log to keep
   around.  Each logfile will be of size ``logfile_maxbytes``.

--logfile_compression=COMPRESSION

   Compress backup copies of supervisord activity log with COMPRESSION
   algorithm. Supported values are ``copy`` (default), ``gzip``,
   ``bzip2`` and ``xz``.

-e LEVEL, --loglevel=LEVEL

   The logging level at which supervisor should write to the activity
   log.  Valid levels are ``trace``, ``debug``, ``info``, ``warn``,
   ``error``, and ``critical``.

-j FILE, --pidfile=FILE

   The filename to which supervisord should write its pid file.

-i STRING, --identifier=STRING

   Arbitrary string identifier exposed by various client UIs for this
   instance of supervisor.

-q PATH, --childlogdir=PATH

   A path to a directory (it must already exist) where supervisor will
   write its ``AUTO`` -mode child process logs.

-k, --nocleanup

   Prevent :program:`supervisord` from performing cleanup (removal of
   old ``AUTO`` process log files) at startup.

-a NUM, --minfds=NUM

   The minimum number of file descriptors that must be available to
   the supervisord process before it will start successfully.

-t, --strip_ansi

   Strip ANSI escape sequences from all child log process.

-v, --version

   Print the supervisord version number out to stdout and exit.

--profile_options=LIST

   Comma-separated options list for profiling.  Causes
   :program:`supervisord` to run under a profiler, and output results
   based on the options, which is a comma-separated list of the
   following: ``cumulative``, ``calls``, ``callers``.
   E.g. ``cumulative,callers``.

--minprocs=NUM

   The minimum number of OS process slots that must be available to
   the supervisord process before it will start successfully.


Running :program:`supervisorctl`
--------------------------------

To start :program:`supervisorctl`, run ``$BINDIR/supervisorctl``.  A
shell will be presented that will allow you to control the processes
that are currently managed by :program:`supervisord`.  Type "help" at
the prompt to get information about the supported commands.

The :command:`supervisorctl` executable may be invoked with "one time"
commands when invoked with arguments from a command line.  An example:
``supervisorctl stop all``.  If arguments are present on the
command-line, it will prevent the interactive shell from being
invoked.  Instead, the command will be executed and ``supervisorctl``
will exit with a code of 0 for success or running and non-zero for
error. An example: ``supervisorctl status all`` would return non-zero
if any single process was not running.

If :command:`supervisorctl` is invoked in interactive mode against a
:program:`supervisord` that requires authentication, you will be asked
for authentication credentials.

:command:`supervisorctl` Command-Line Options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-c, --configuration

   Configuration file path (default /etc/supervisord.conf)

-h, --help

   Print usage message and exit

-i, --interactive

   Start an interactive shell after executing commands

-s, --serverurl URL

   URL on which supervisord server is listening (default "http://localhost:9001").

-u, --username

   Username to use for authentication with server

-p, --password

   Password to use for authentication with server

-r, --history-file

   Keep a readline history (if readline is available)

`action [arguments]`

Actions are commands like "tail" or "stop".  If -i is specified or no action is
specified on the command line, a "shell" interpreting actions typed
interactively is started.  Use the action "help" to find out about available
actions.


:command:`supervisorctl` Actions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

help

   Print a list of available actions

help <action>

   Print help for <action>

add <name> [...]

   Activates any updates in config for process/group

remove <name> [...]

   Removes process/group from active config
   
update

   Reload config and add/remove as necessary, and will restart affected programs
   
update all

   Reload config and add/remove as necessary, and will restart affected programs

update <gname> [...]

   Update specific groups, and will restart affected programs

clear <name>

   Clear a process' log files.

clear <name> <name>

   Clear multiple process' log files

clear all

   Clear all process' log files

fg <process>

   Connect to a process in foreground mode
   Press Ctrl+C to exit foreground

pid

   Get the PID of supervisord.

pid <name>

   Get the PID of a single child process by name.

pid all

   Get the PID of every child process, one per line.

reload

   Restarts the remote supervisord

reread

   Reload the daemon's configuration files, without add/remove (no restarts)

restart <name>

   Restart a process
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

restart <gname>:*

   Restart all processes in a group
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

restart <name> <name>

   Restart multiple processes or groups
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

restart all

   Restart all processes
   Note: restart does not reread config files. For that, see reread and update.

signal

   No help on signal

start <name>

   Start a process

start <gname>:*

   Start all processes in a group

start <name> <name>

   Start multiple processes or groups

start all

   Start all processes

status

   Get all process status info.

status <name>

   Get status on a single process by name.

status <name> <name>

   Get status on multiple named processes.

stop <name>

   Stop a process

stop <gname>:*

   Stop all processes in a group

stop <name> <name>

   Stop multiple processes or groups

stop all

   Stop all processes

tail [-f] <name> [stdout|stderr] (default stdout)

   Output the last part of process logs
   Ex:
   tail -f <name>		Continuous tail of named process stdout Ctrl-C to exit.
   tail -100 <name>	last 100 *bytes* of process stdout
   tail <name> stderr	last 1600 *bytes* of process stderr


Signals
-------

The :program:`supervisord` program may be sent signals which cause it
to perform certain actions while it's running.

You can send any of these signals to the single :program:`supervisord`
process id.  This process id can be found in the file represented by
the ``pidfile`` parameter in the ``[supervisord]`` section of the
configuration file (by default it's :file:`$CWD/supervisord.pid`).

Signal Handlers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``SIGTERM``

  :program:`supervisord` and all its subprocesses will shut down.
  This may take several seconds.

``SIGINT``

  :program:`supervisord` and all its subprocesses will shut down.
  This may take several seconds.

``SIGQUIT``

  :program:`supervisord` and all its subprocesses will shut down.
  This may take several seconds.

``SIGHUP``

  :program:`supervisord` will stop all processes, reload the
  configuration from the first config file it finds, and start all
  processes.

``SIGUSR2``

  :program:`supervisord` will close and reopen the main activity log
  and all child log files.

Runtime Security
----------------

The developers have done their best to assure that use of a
:program:`supervisord` process running as root cannot lead to
unintended privilege escalation.  But **caveat emptor**.  Supervisor
is not as paranoid as something like DJ Bernstein's
:term:`daemontools`, inasmuch as :program:`supervisord` allows for
arbitrary path specifications in its configuration file to which data
may be written.  Allowing arbitrary path selections can create
vulnerabilities from symlink attacks.  Be careful when specifying
paths in your configuration.  Ensure that the :program:`supervisord`
configuration file cannot be read from or written to by unprivileged
users and that all files installed by the supervisor package have
"sane" file permission protection settings.  Additionally, ensure that
your ``PYTHONPATH`` is sane and that all Python standard
library files have adequate file permission protections.

Running :program:`supervisord` automatically on startup
-------------------------------------------------------

If you are using a distribution-packaged version of Supervisor, it should
already be integrated into the service management infrastructure of your
distribution.

There are user-contributed scripts for various operating systems at:
https://github.com/Supervisor/initscripts

There are some answers at Serverfault in case you get stuck:
`How to automatically start supervisord on Linux (Ubuntu)`__

.. __: http://serverfault.com/questions/96499/how-to-automatically-start-supervisord-on-linux-ubuntu
